I've kind of built up this Persona of
being this real life Tony Stark Captain
America Batman kind of character we did
a million dollars in one week kids who
look up to me think I have the best life
ever sometimes I don't even like the
life I have that's one of the most
honest things I've heard the pressure
and the stress the actual cost to make
the video over 100 Grand of 52 million
just on the building how can you inspire
the Next Generation if you go bankrupt
it's a great question you aren't a
business if you do everything yourself
nobody's talking about what you just
said you were mentored by Grant Thompson
he was a huge YouTuber before he passed
I still have some of the last texts he
sent me he beat YouTube It's very rare
to do can I ask you a more personal
question are you a shitty entrepreneur
um I think so
why you're very good at what you
[Music]
do oh my
God James the Hackman dude thanks for
having me at your studio my pleasure I
mean I'm saying Studio but it's really
an 18 acre campus I mean how much do you
spend on this place to again uh probably
about 5 and a half million just on the
building oh my God and how many
employees do you have working for you on
your YouTube channel uh 27 fulltime
right now I have so many questions that
I want to get into um you're known as a
hacksmith to your 14 million subscribers
but to me you're kind of like a
combination of a real life iron man
crossed with Luke Skywalker cuz you've
done so much in your 18 years on YouTube
that so many creators can learn from um
you set a world record for having the
world's first retractable lightsaber um
but I want to say context because right
now we're in your 18 acre campus um so
why do you need that much space to make
YouTube videos it was it was always part
of the master plan I wanted to have a
space where it didn't matter what kind
of project we were working on we'd have
the room and the resources to do it um
so
even from the garage and the garage was
obviously very big garage yeah um that
was your space before this uh two spaces
before this actually and it it was a
dream workshop but we always wanted to
do more do bigger things and whatnot
yeah so um when we finally found this
property it was perfect uh lots of
outdoor space lots of building lots of
room to develop future buildings cuz I'm
calling out a campus I need I need a few
more buildings to really call out a
campus so i' I've been working on
building up herk uh so it stands for the
hacksmith engineering research campus
Because as we know from comic books
every cool organization needs a acronym
in this building every little detail the
interior design thinking about what it
would be like to walk through here uh as
a kid as as someone who's uh interested
and inspired by the movies and wants to
make a brighter future dude I mean I
mean the operation that you built here
on top of YouTube also I think you're
pushing the boundaries when it comes to
engineering and also if I'm being honest
James I think you're criminally
underrated like I I it just boggles my
mind like I had to fly all the way out
here to you know the suburbs of Toronto
to just see what was going on it's blown
my mind like the tour that we did
yesterday um before we get into all the
things that you're doing to really push
YouTube and the engineering World
forward I want to talk about a video
that you made that got 40 million views
and got the fire department called on
you um and that was the video where you
made the world first ever working
lightsaber why did you want to make a
lightsaber and um talk about that
process um so it was kind of the
moonshot where it's like man if we could
make a real life lightsaber that would
that'd be pretty incredible and it was
actually my business partner who came up
with the the first concepts for it so we
actually started with a essentially
super heated metal stick that literally
glowed white hot so it was more of a a
yellow orange beam the neat thing with
that was you could actually duel with it
it could cut through things not very
fast um but the big downside was it
wasn't retractable and that's like one
of the main things for a lightsaber yeah
um so then as we continued working on
that um I think it was Bogden and I who
discovered the Lamer Flow gas no nozzle
and we're like wow that beam looks like
a lightsaber it's even
blue and um we bought a few they're very
expensive like $4 or $5,000 just for the
nozzle because it's a a really difficult
to manufacture part and then we set to
work making it into more of a lightsaber
and that project has now taken hundreds
of thousands of dollars to make and now
you have a clean room where you're
trying to make one that's cordless um
which I want to talk about how you fund
all this with the volatility of YouTube
and how you've built this business cuz I
think no matter if you're an engineer or
not like if you're trying to be a
Creator there's a ton that you could
learn from your 18 years on the platform
um but I want to rewind back to the I
think like just a moment that would have
given me a ton of anxiety which was when
before you were even making products
that were from the movie screens you
were working a day job where you were
literally making movie screens um um you
you're working for a company that made
digital projectors um you're an engineer
there uh take me through that moment
where you're like you know what I'm
going to do YouTube I actually
asked my manager if I could potentially
work part-time like take a pay cut work
part-time so I could focus more on
YouTube and he said yes and then moved
up to the director of engineering and he
said yes and it went up to the senior
director of engineering and he said yes
we don't want to lose
Hopson but then it hit the the VP of
engineering and the human resources
department and they're like whoa we
can't make an exception for one person
then everyone's going to want to work
part-time um and I'm actually glad they
said no to me because that was enough
for me to make the leap of faith yeah
and I handed in my resignation that next
Monday I'm like see you I had about six
months of savings I pulled out my rrsp
which is the equalent of 401k um and I
had about six months to make it if I
recall like I pulled up the numbers you
only had 70,000 subscribers at the time
oh yeah we were we were not making it I
was making a hundred bucks a month off
ad Revenue yeah luckily I I had a
part-time job as a a writer for hackaday
I wrote over a thousand articles for
that website between 2013 and 2017 and I
also had an Etsy store where I sold
laser engraved cutting boards so I I did
have a few side hustles that kind of
helped maintain some of my bills but
YouTube really needed to grow to be able
to let me actually really do it
full-time and that summer we had our
viral hit our first viral hit which was
the Captain America electromagnet shield
and we went from 100 ,000 subscribers to
half a million in one month and that
kind of set off the chain reaction for
the channel where we doubled in size
year over-ear for four years in a row
from subscribers views employees Revenue
sponsorships pretty much everything and
um experiencing that kind of exponential
growth as a business is a great problem
to have like it's I'm very grateful for
it but the challenge when everything
thing is growing like that you don't
necessarily build the best processes or
the best system and you're you almost
get tunnel vision because it's just like
well YouTube's our Golden Goose and what
we're doing is working but the way we do
do those things wasn't necessarily
sustainable or um the proper way so uh
after the pandemic which is when our
Channel kind of slowed down and little
plateaued for a little while suddenly
some of those weak points emerged and
was just like oh man this is not maybe
maybe we should have done a few things
differently like what like what what are
some of those things in those early days
you wish you set up a process for you
wish you did differently I'd say the
biggest one which is a a challenge for
all YouTubers is if you really want to
expand your business you need to involve
more people and when you're a solo
YouTuber that means potentially sharing
the spotlight having other hosts on your
videos and whatnot um and and building
up an audience for the whole thing the
company I guess instead of just one
person and we have historically I always
give credit to my team when they work on
projects um and from the beginning
people played small roles in the videos
but it took us a while to actually try
and have more like dedicated videos
where I wasn't actually involved at all
and the hard part with YouTube is um
YouTubers are are made they're not found
they're not created per se um you really
you have to go through that process of
being the producer the director the
videographer the host all those things
in one so when you try and business FY
it I don't know if that's a word um it's
very difficult because you can't just
throw a new person in front of the
screen and expect them to be a YouTuber
yeah um it's not like a news anchor
where you can just throw someone else on
stage and they can read the teleprompter
yeah you got to you got to build them up
and that's definitely been the biggest
challenge that we've had of um not
replacing me but adding more um more of
the team to the roster which doesn't um
create additional work for me because
the only way to scale a business is to
well in general make more content and my
time is very limited and the other
biggest challenge that we had like we we
we chose one of the hardest things to do
on YouTube because the engineering can
take weeks or months or years and then
you make the video that's really hard
like we don't have any kind of easy
toake content that you could actually
like schedule I kind of wish we started
a podcast years ago because that would
have been something we could make on a
weekly basis like I sit down and I talk
to some of them for a few hours I'm
wondering like I pulled up your business
plan from 2013 and I just wanted to call
out one line in it that uh James stood
out to me you said uh this is your
master plan quote um we want to continue
trying out far out ideas and to push the
envelope over just commercial viability
all while inspiring the next generation
of
inventors my question to you is how can
you inspire the Next Generation
if you go bankrupt yeah it's a great
question
uh so the reason I had that line about
commercial viability was a lightsaber is
not a commercial viable product right in
any sense of the word really um but that
doesn't mean it shouldn't exist and that
doesn't mean it can't create value in
another way and especially with the
lightsaber it's inspired people to go
into engineering like I didn't think
that was possible I didn't think
engineering was cool so the commercial
viability line is is really more just
about the the video
series um the the main goal moving
forwards is I do really like product
development and I do inspiring the next
generation of kids into Science Tech
engineering the Arts math Etc is amazing
but I I I have a deep down desire to
like make something that also changes
the world and I don't know what that
something is um but I think I have a
line there about like making tools to um
continue to push Society forward so we
haven't quite figured that out yet but
as part of the plan that's why we
started the retail division so we're
starting with more simple things we
start with basic YouTuber merch but like
really high quality clothes parallel
accessories and we're moving into
hacksmith tools that's really actually
just a learning exercise for us it's
learning how to manufacture things it's
learning how to do Logistics uh Supply
Chain management Etc so when we when we
finally do come up with a potential
world changing idea we have the tools
and resources to actually take it
through to completion yeah I want to
spend more time talking about that the
boom period when you were like you left
your job um you had your side hustles
that helped fund the YouTube channel and
you were growing what was the most
uncomfortable cost uh or investment that
you made during those early days when
you were growing but you're like oh my
God maybe this is uh maybe I'm spending
a bit too much money too soon yeah so um
one of our most expensive random
purchases was a small jet engine it was
like $5,000 and it was just like that's
like a month salary for me when I was an
engineer I'm just gonna buy this just to
mess around with and um luckily I think
the very first video we used um trended
on YouTube and paid for it and we're
just like whoa whoa maybe there maybe
there's also like a niche of unique
stuff that not many people
have can make good content too
especially if you you add some some
engineering to it and whatnot um I think
when we made the transition to the first
facility um which was after the
garage um I think the the rent was like
10 or $15,000 a month M and that was a
huge
like whoa and
um as the business has grown it's just
it's almost become it's people talk
about like funny money it's just like it
stops making sense so for example the
money coming in from YouTube or no the
money you were spending the
money yeah yeah you're overhead yeah so
like for example our overhead right now
is over a quarter million dollars a
month
wow I couldn't spend a quarter million
dollars myself unless I was like buying
Rolexes every weekend and maybe a
Ferrari every you know it's just it's
inconceivable and the I think the scary
part with running a business is
especially on YouTube if you're not
making videos those costs are still
there and and somehow over the years it
went from spending lots of money on
projects to now we just spend lots of
money on existing just existing um we do
spend sometimes tens of thousands of
dollars on a project but the actual cost
to make the video If You generalize it
and just equalize it over the content
produced over the overhead spent you're
looking at over a 100 Grand to make a
video W and it's not I spent a 100 Grand
buying 20 jet engines to build some kind
of flying machine it's just so it just
disappears and that was a really really
hard thing to I don't think I've
actually fully accepted as just like
what are we what are we doing like um
like the money on YouTube can be great
but it can also it's very up and down so
um it's it's a little scary at times
because I can't just sit back I can't
really take a break and I've tried to
take a break and it hasn't worked out
well for us
um whereas if I had kept it small if I
had stayed in my
garage I could take a break CU what
payments do I have to worry about the
mortgage maybe some electricity like
normal things yeah um but now that we
have this huge facility property and
resources just the the operating costs
are huge and that's a really difficult
wall to be pushed up against and
sometimes it results in creating content
that we can make not that we should make
and I think that's been some of our
downfall over the years where it's just
like despite growing to the size we are
sometimes the projects we do are still
relatively simple it's just like well
what was the point of building all this
when we're making simple things and
whatnot um I wish we were um just doing
big projects and maybe posting monthly
or bonly but each of those projects gets
millions of views and that lets us keep
going but because of our high costs
we're kind of stuck in this trap where
even if we wanted to try a new strategy
we don't have a pile of money to fall
back on so we can't really we can't
invest in the chance of getting to that
stage so then we're stuck producing the
content we're able to produce and in
some ways some of that content is not
even what our audience is hoping to see
from us we've already set the bar pretty
high building real life lightsabers and
um the power loader from Aliens and
stuff like that where um it's it's
really challenging running an
engineering business on YouTube what's a
piece of content or like an engineering
product that you make because you're
forced to continue to run on this
hamster wheel um so a good example is
when we do like dedicated
sponsorships um not all dedicated
sponsorships are bad the best ones are
when I'm working with directly with a
movie studio making something from the
movie so like the John Wick bulletproof
suit those ones the audience loves
because it's like whoa the hacksmith
worked with the company that made the
movie right that we all love yeah and
that's a very it's a hand inhand
partnership that makes so much sense and
I wish I literally wish I just had
closer relationships with all the movie
production Studios and we got to know
what was coming out ahead of time and
actually had time to really engineer
something really cool um but over the
years um since we are on that treadmill
we've taken dedicated sponsorships from
some random mobile games that aren't
very popular and those are the kind of
videos that you get lots of comments
being like ah ask Miss sellout and it's
just like I'm just trying to keep food
on the table for the team and in the
early days it was okay because we had a
lot of content like weekly content for
the first seven years um so you could
slide in a few dedicated sponsorships
and it's kind of like you know a [__]
sandwich it's just like there's lots
good stuff and here can you watch this
too um because that's what's paying the
bills um but the problem is doing too
many over the years suddenly you've
you've lost the reason you were doing it
in the first place and it's now we have
to do these things just to exist and the
whole idea was this was never supposed
to be a job I wasn't supposed to be
accountable to someone above me and
right now that someone above me is
actually my company because I have to do
things to make money to be able to keep
everyone employed and keep things moving
so there's been a ton of challenges and
that's led to burnout multiple times um
I post a video sharing some mental
health struggles even posting that video
I feel like hurt the channel because um
the people who watched it heard the
whole story but the somewhat clickbait
title of I think I'm done making videos
if you look at the Impressions on that
video it got viewed like 5 million times
but 95 million people saw the thumbnail
and title yeah so I potentially just
told 95 million people I'm done making
YouTube videos and for months even even
a year after that it's just like Oh I
thought the hacks must stop making
videos I like what's this yeah and it
was a bit of a faux paw on my part um
the video did a lot to help um encourage
the conversation around mental health
especially men's mental health so I I
think it still had a net positive for
the world but it might have been a net
negative for the business and we're
still kind of feeling some repercussions
from that where the views have kind of
dropped off over the years and it's been
hard to find our stride again I I want
to talk about that video because you've
since changed the title of it so now
it's you know about running a business
on YouTube is hard versus um people
thinking that you left especially in
light of all the retirement and I quit
YouTube videos out there right now yeah
there's you only get one shot with one
of these videos it's yeah um but there
there was this 10-second clip that I
pulled in it James that I I think it's
one of the most authentic and vulnerable
moments that I've ever seen in a YouTube
video and I just wanted to have you play
it and react to it and then add a
follow-up question I was already burned
out from pushing so hard in the garage
guilt for building a business that I
myself could not thrive in almost
started overwhelming me almost
everything seemed like a mistake with
only myself to blame realization that I
was a shitty entrepreneur broke my
confidence and my ability to move
forward why did you call yourself a
shitty entrepreneur I mean you're such a
smart YouTuber engineer like are you a
shitty entrepreneur I think so why hey
guys I want to show you another part of
the hacksmith campus but first I want to
say thank you to do store who helped
sponsor this video and do this interview
all the way in Toronto because dot store
is a domain that so many big creators
from the hacksmith to Mr be to Zack King
trust because really you don't want to
have one of those domains that goes
shop.com do/ subdomain it just gets so
confusing with do store it's simple it's
to the point and it's actually shown to
boost sales because every time you
advertise a merch link that's not a DOT
store you're basically shooting yourself
in the face and you're creating a dent
in your brand that you don't want to
have there dot store is sharp specific
and immediately gets at what you're
trying to go for in fact it's what we're
using to launch created. store our new
merch store with DOT store the exclusive
place where you can get our merch and so
many new products that we're excited to
develop with creators for creators and
you're in luck because you could get
your own dot store for only 99 C make
sure to check out this link below as
well as in the description and use code
John to get a discount at checkout all
right now back to the video um
just like I said the the way I ended up
building the business um didn't allow me
to thrive and that was the whole the
whole reason of doing all this I wanted
to make stuff and at that point I
literally didn't even want to make
things my business partner had to force
me to start developing this lab he's
just like just start working on
it this is your personal this is my
personal R&B your trying to get back
some of the garage days essentially
right here and um but I was so burned
out I'm just like I don't even I don't
even want to make things even though
that's what I love and that's what I
wanted to do there's this great quote I
don't know if Marquez is the guy who
actually came up with it but I heard it
him say it so and I've repeated a bunch
since then but he he basically says
being a YouTuber is like being an
octopus so um you've got eight arms and
they all do different things someone is
the director some like one of your arms
directs one holds the camera one writes
one does this blah blah blah
and and the problem is when you try and
turn that into a business you inevitably
have to basically give up some of your
tentacles um you got to give away the
camera tentacle because now someone's
going to hold the camera for you you
might give away the editing tentacle
because someone's going to edit for you
and um I've never fact checked this
actually but I'm hoping it's true but
apparently octopi have three hearts not
just one and they aren't located in his
chest they're located in some of these
tentacles so what that means is you
might be the best at three things so
those are the easiest things you can
teach someone else and then give them
that job and if the heart was in those
arms you've just taken away all the
things that you were actually passionate
about what you had the heart for and now
you're doing the stuff that you didn't
even like and I feel like I did that way
too much building this business and then
I ended up in a position where the stuff
I had to do wasn't the stuff I wanted to
do
and it just resulted in a lot of guilt
feeling like wow I really [__] this up
like this is supposed to be a dream job
like the kids who look up to me think I
have the best life ever it's just like
why why like sometimes I don't even
don't even like life I have because of
the the Press pressure and the stress I
have and it feels like if I went a
different path it could be it could be
different and I'm trying to get back on
track but it's a huge challenge because
now we have this huge complicated
machine that is the business and we
don't have the flexibility to truly like
like other examples when YouTubers have
taken breaks sometimes they just
actually like [__] off for a year or
months and then they come back with
Renewed Energy I can't really fully do
that because the business isn't
sustainable without me and I risk losing
everything everything I've built
essentially um and I've already seen
that happen multiple times where it's
just like I've stepped back and it
hasn't worked and it hasn't worked
because obviously we haven't built the
right system the right process is the
right way of doing things that is either
scalable or sustainable
um and that makes it really hard how
many employees work for you right now I
think the current count is 27 so the
retail team is four people here and you
have about 50 retail products that you
sell right now yeah and then we have a
team of about six Engineers we've got a
shop team of four the shop team um
manages facilities here but also works
on projects um in addition to that we
have um human resources is it we have a
company Chef who makes Incredible food
for us every single day there's my
business partner um our head of Business
Development we've got an accountant um
do you regret growing too fast too
quickly yeah
there's hindsight's 2020 but there's a
lot of things I would have would have
done differently there's a world
where um I could have stayed in the
garage there's a chance we could have
still gotten the new facility but maybe
that's a facility behind the scenes um
because the other huge thing that we
lost when we moved from the garage to a
big big facility was we were no longer
relatable it was no longer you couldn't
imagine yourself in your dad's garage
making these crazy projects because now
we're in a a shiny Fancy Clean facility
um we almost set ourselves up for
failure by trying to be the real life
Stark Industries when that's setting the
bar so high we can never even reach it
we're never going to build an Iron Man
suit just like the movies the physics
doesn't work out our lightsaber is never
going to be exactly like the movies the
physics doesn't work out physics is our
biggest enemy really um but there's a
world where we could have kept the
garage as a set and continued making
things there's also a world where um I
could have hosted everything but had
teams of Engineers making the projects
and I'm kind of like a celebrity chef
where I I pull out the finished goods
from the oven and say I made it um but
from the start I've always I've wanted
to give everyone who works on these
projects credit for what they've done um
but from a business standpoint it's so
much easier to just have one one
character that you build an audience
around and there probably would have
been a sustainable way to do that other
channels have done this um I don't
regret not doing that because I think I
think that's kind of uh disingenuous to
take credit for stuff that you haven't
done or make it seem like you take
credit like sometimes you can like give
credit but it's kind of like an
afterthought or it's just like if you
weren't paying attention fully it's like
oh wow the hacksmith made this and the
hacksmith made that it's just like no
the team made this the team made that
and the way you present that really has
an impact on um how people interpret it
yeah um but from a strictly business
sense I bet it probably would have
panned out much better it's much easier
to have maintain that real life Tony
Stark Vibe and it's just like wow the
hacksmith can do anything it's like yes
the hacksmith can do anything with this
team of 25 Engineers behind him you know
who are some of those other channels you
mentioned that have done this one host
thing well I mean I'm not going to name
names but disingenuous channels out
there where it's like you're present
presenting one thing but it's actually
completely different um and I don't I
wouldn't want to I wouldn't want to be
them I wouldn't want to be in their
shoes I wouldn't want to have built this
lie essentially yeah um because it's
it's yeah because if if you build
something like for example like um you
know Thor's uh um yoler or Thor Thor's
stormhammer like you're showing you
building it versus if somebody on your
team built it you're having them in the
video with you exactly um yeah and for
some small things like 99% of the time
they're either shown or the credit is
given there are some things where it's
just like um what we talk about is like
it's like being a ghost engineer it's
like being a ghost writer um there is
work that needs to be done to enable
this other thing and if you think about
it as a company as a business and as a
job that's just a job lots of people
have jobs like that and there's there's
not necessarily anything wrong with it
yeah it's just it's the only way to to
to make that work in some cases and and
just so I'm understanding and thinking
about like YouTubers who aren't um just
thinking about engineering it almost
seems like you got to go towards one of
two extremes you either have to be the
main host and then build up a team while
still making it look like you're small
and in a garage or somewhere that's
relatable but it's still you presenting
yeah or you have to go towards the Other
Extreme and have co-hosts build up a
team build up a team and are at the same
level and on camera with you so that if
you want to take a step back that
co-host has enough of a relationship
with the audience to continue and give
you time off exactly and you felt like
you did in the middle which is why you
can't really do either or take time off
and why you feel a lot of that burnout
did I correct me if I'm wrong but is
that a good summary yeah wow I I I feel
like so many YouTubers are stuck in the
middle like that because it is it's it's
a risk trying to build up other people
part of the team if you think about like
at the purely raw sense built up the
first 10 million subscribers mostly
around me MH that's very hard you can't
just be like this is Joe right you
should be fans of Joe it doesn't work
like that yeah you have to bring Joe in
and it's like oh who's that guy oh I
recognize that guy oh he's hosting his
own video oh cool and we we have done
that um to some degree of success but
not in a robust enough way that has
enabled me to really take time off and
the thing that kills me most is over the
past few years my my contribution to
videos has been almost the bare minimum
which isn't enough it's all that I've
had to give it's not even adding the
value that it should be because it's not
even my video it's not I'm not
producing it I'm not I'm not telling the
story can I ask you a more personal
question uh you were mentored by uh
Grant Thompson and uh he was a huge
YouTuber before he passed in a tragic
paragliding accident um I know when I
worked at YouTube he was one of those
big creators who always took time out
and talked to me and just gave me advice
as I try to go from corporate um to try
in this Creator thing you have one of
your rooms in your campus here name
after Grant Thompson can you talk about
some of the advice he gave cuz he was
one of the biggest YouTubers The King of
Random channel that he started YouTube
but he he he made a lot of products he
was able to hire a team um he did so
much what what was some of the advice he
gave because he he seemed to have a
process around so much and I feel like
if he was still alive today he would be
teaching so many other YouTubers um so
I'm curious what are some of the things
you've learned or some of the things
that you're still trying to learn from
what Grant taught you I like every other
staring YouTuber out there was trying
making my own videos and whatnot and
shamelessly asked him for a collab
because that's what all small YouTubers
do he actually took time out of his day
to reply to my email I still have it
somewhere um and he basically told me um
fairly general advice like focus on
making the best videos you can mhm and
and and I think one of the closing lines
was when it comes time to do a collab
you won't have to
ask and uh he he basically fulfilled
that prophecy because I think it was
when I was at a million or two million
subscribers one day I got this phone
call and the caller ID said Grant
Thompson and he was calling me to ask if
he could come visit because he was
inspired by the videos I was doing um
and that's that started of fairly sadly
short friendship um but it just it meant
so much
like basically meeting your hero and
then hearing what you're doing is what
they wanted to do so even though he
um I'd like to say he he beat YouTube
and that's it's very [__] rare to do
because he formed the processes in place
and hired co-hosts Nate and c and in the
beginning the audience rebelled they
like we want to see Grant not you're not
the king of random but they kept pushing
and ended up having more getting to the
point of doing better than when he ran
the channel and he essentially
retired um and and the reason he was
able to do that was he he talked a lot
about um a book that I've read now
called the eth the entrepreneurial myth
and basically the what what what the
book says is you aren't a business if
you do everything yourself there's a
really powerful quote of
1% of small businesses succeed so out of
every 100 entrepreneurs only one makes
it but 99% of franchise owners do
succeed MH and that's because besides
having an existing brand franchises have
a Playbook
this is how we do things this is the
process to make a Big Mac this is how we
hire people this is how you do this and
what the book goes on to say is
basically as an experiment even if you
have no plans of other ever selling your
business I need to provide the
instructions on how to run it and doing
that exercise of turning everything you
do into a process that is recreatable
enables you to actually start stepping
back because it actually lets you give
lasting knowledge to then the people who
have to do that job versus this is kind
of how I do things yeah um and whatnot
so he really took that book to heart and
he created processes of how do we come
up Ide with ideas for videos how do we
edit videos what's the standard process
and Ian and I went to visit him um I
think it was probably November
2017 um wear learned a lot from him and
and tried to apply a lot of those things
making some processes and whatnot um
once he succeed in stepping back from
YouTube he essentially retired and he
started spending time with his family
again he started going on vacations he
started enjoying life he started picking
up hobbies that he had had dropped years
ago um sadly one of those was
paragliding which
resulted in him losing his
life but
he he beat YouTube and he in in those
two years I'm sure he lived a lifetime
of more than most people do um and I
still have some of the the last texts he
sent me because he always tried to to
Mentor me and um a lot of them were
talking about how I'm so burnt out and
he had been through it all because he
almost quit multiple times but he pushed
through and he made a lot of sacrifices
in the beginning when he was growing his
channel like do you still look back at
those texts I
do do do you feel comfortable reading
any of them
or take a
look that's good advice and I think it
it honors his memory um so I was talking
about being burned out and whatnot and
then uh he said our opportunities start
are getting so big I could foresee
losing my whole life to them and while
we could be ridiculously rich and famous
I always try to think about the purpose
of why I was working so hard what was
the point and since we had already had
enough money to achieve every goal I set
out to achieve it would be
counterproductive to do more because I
would miss my kids growing up grow away
from my wife and delay all the passions
I wanted to explore until I was too old
to enjoy them so we pulled the trigger
talking about stepping back from YouTube
and letting someone else run it and made
the decision that we made it and we
didn't have to go to the next level
because we had already arrived now the
quality of life is through the roof and
happiness has never been
better
and I probably could have made that
point a long time ago and might be a lot
happier
today thank you for sharing that I mean
I I so many fun memories of Grant and
just um he was
incredible yeah any would always take
time
to to to go out and meet fans he never
never let Fame get to his head I try and
honor that I I always say yes to photos
autographs
I yeah yeah
um is there any other process thing
you've learned either from Grant or like
anyone else I mean one thing that stood
out to me as we did like our Tour all
around your campus in this office is
that you have cameras ready to go like
for some I don't know I I get anxiety
around like the setup time of filming
and inspiration can be so fleeting that
I find like the fact that now it's like
everything is set up and you get ready
to go maybe something that like you
didn't have like earlier um yeah so that
that was a big pain point because um in
the garage days often I would just set
up a tripod yeah or Ian would film yeah
while we're working on something and it
meant we could work late into the night
on whatever project wherever and when
this became more of a business suddenly
everything was 9 to5 and you had to make
sure that you scheduled time
to have someone there to film you and
and whatnot and the problem with um
especially my process I have ADHD
sometimes I hyperfocus on things and
it's all I want to do yeah um but that's
not possible if that hyperfocus comes at
2: a.m. so one of the things that I've
done in my personal lab which I'm going
to do a tour video hopefully fairly soon
is I've actually got 4K PTZ cameras a
dozen of them spread throughout here and
they actually yeah they're watching us
right now yeah yeah I've actually got
this um custom production tablet that I
made uses a vmount battery last for
eight hours and from this I can control
all the cameras I can change the angles
I have clean wireless audio everything's
piped back to my PC and the
hope I finished building the system like
six months ago I still haven't made a
video in here yet really um but the hope
is I'll be able to get back to what I
love which is actually making things and
even doing some of the recording process
myself and this was one of the ways that
I'm trying to reduce the friction in
making content
because I can just work and I know
there'll be footage I probably still
don't want to go through all that
footage I'll probably hire someone or
let someone else do the assembly cut but
then I imagine I will probably be
putting the story together yeah because
one of the other biggest challenges
with um becoming a business is when
YouTubers wear all the
hats it's easy because there's a key
there's one decision mhm um you have an
idea of what you're doing how you want
to present it all this right when you
hire an editor and if you let them do
everything who's telling the
story is it the person who's actually
doing the thing or is it the editor's
interpretation of the story based on
what he
filmed and it's a very
subtle difference but people can notice
it because there's a difference between
a YouTuber who still produces everything
that he makes makes and a business where
multiple people are giving feedback it's
it's a collaborative effort and
sometimes that can work yeah but I think
at the heart of YouTube it's it's you
telling the
story and the the biggest challenge we
had with trying to have
co-hosts and um create essentially other
YouTubers is well technically it's the
engineer story
but the editor is putting it together
and unless they're working side by side
super close which we've tried to um
promote and tried to encourage it still
kind of becomes this this back and back
and forth that isn't actually the whole
the whole story so even when I work on a
project I end up wanting to take more
control of the edit because I have this
vision of how the video is going to be
because it's my story tell and the
biggest thing with storytelling is you
can tell someone else's story but it's
never as impactful as when you tell your
own story yeah if you're not the one
creating the piece of content your story
can get twisted and and be become
different sometimes it can work I I
think that's why you'll see that a lot
of the big YouTubers are still
extremely connected to that process yeah
one of the things where trying to do as
a source of more sustainable content is
what we like to call one-day builds so
you got essentially 12 hours to make a
project and film a video we haven't had
many one day builds do super well but
I'm hopeful they can become a recurring
source of uh content for us because and
and even if it doesn't it helps teach
the
team how
to make a YouTube video essentially
because the beauty with a one-day build
is you have this set footage you were
there the entire story there is nothing
you missed and you can then take that
and create a video The Challenge we run
into so much with our content is when
the engineering takes weeks or months or
years it doesn't matter how passionate
you were about the idea at the start
it's going to start dragging on yeah and
now you have gigabytes or even terabytes
of footage the amount of different ways
you could weave that story now yeah it's
like it's like the Multiverse it's just
like there's all these different paths
whereas a one-day build it's kind of
like it's mostly One path right because
you either just include all the footage
and that is the true yeah fully true
story and you can create that story but
when anything extends past a week or
past a month Suddenly It's like well we
could refilm this and go this way we
could we could do that
and um I think you also get a lot of
decision fatigue when you have way too
many possibilities because then you
start second guessing yourself it's just
like how do I make a banger video and
you're like oh well let's do it this way
and sometimes it's like we have a good
idea it's like oh this has a much better
chance all right let's refilm all this
and do it that way and you're just kind
of I don't know painting yourself into a
corner where you're overwhelmed with
possibilities and again if it's a
collaborative effort those possibilities
are even greater because everyone has
their own idea this should be a dream
job for everyone working here we have
incredible
resources benefits the amount of
comments we get where it's like I wish I
could work for the amount of
applications we get this should be a
dream job and I think the most ironic
part of me building all this was I
created a dream job for
engineers but it's not my job the
engineers get to focus on just one
project I would love to focus on a
project but even when I focus on a
project it's like I have to focus on 10
10 different projects
and that's part of the reason why I'm
I'm not
thriving because I can't I think there's
so much to unpack there one I love the
idea of experimenting with new formats
you know you having your hero format
with Marvel like and the make it real
like and then I think uh one day builds
it actually reminds me a lot of my
interview with dude perfect because they
had their trick shots which takes so
much time and there's so much
uncertainty to see if they're going to
land you know that basketball like being
thrown at the top of the stadium in
addition to a lot of shots in one video
but then they introduced a comedy form
format which is stereotypes and you know
they moved into that so I think what
you're talking about just speaks to me
at my core because I think every Creator
needs to have hero content and hub
content The Hub keeps people coming back
regularly but it's also easy to produce
that could even be just a podcast format
and the hero content is the once a month
once a quarter we're going all out but
inevitably that is so hard to produce
and if your hero content becomes your
Hub content that's a recipe for disaster
unless you're Mr Beast unless yeah
unless you're Mr Beast who's an outlier
um for all of that I want to ask you all
about your sponsorships business because
I think working with movie studios like
the the the fact that you work with you
know big IP like Marvel Batman Etc
what's the most you've been paid for a
sponsorship today um I think the highest
for a single video was the
semi-automatic baseball Cannon sponsored
by Xbox and MLB the game I think that
was
$135,000 wow and because of that video I
broke my hand and I've got a titanium
plate in five screws in there and if you
asked me if I would do it again for 135
Grand [__] no
yeah I know we talked about that during
our tour yesterday and just uh do do you
ever get scared about putting yourself
In Harm's Way with your videos because
some of these it looks like you're
risking your
life I don't I don't think I've ever
really risked my life we do obviously
play up the danger because that's
Entertainment we we joke because I am
the main stunt man because you would
never ask an employee to do something
dangerous right ironically
I'm also the most valuable employee at
the company um so if you look at our
life insurance
policies me getting hurt is actually
really bad for the company yeah but
having an employee hurt could be even
worse um so typically that's why you'll
see me take the hits yeah and whatnot
um and I do enjoy at least part of it so
I pulled these graphs of how you make
money as a YouTuber um over the years
can you give us a rough breakdown what
was the pie chart of how the hacksmith
makes money in 2020 and what is it now
especially now that you have products
like coming out on hack. store if you're
watching the video this far you're going
to love our newsletter created news just
go to created. newws and every week
you'll get a breakdown of the best
thumbnails on YouTube and why they got
you to click you'll get a breakdown of
the best outliers and top videos and why
they got you to watch and you'll get get
the latest in news for creators why it
matters and how to make sense of it
again just go to created. newws it's
going to be the best email you're going
to get in your inbox every week I
promise right so if you look in 2019
it's probably like a 6040 split
sponsorships to YouTube revenue and then
in 2020 it was almost like 4040 and then
another 20 with everything else and that
was mostly because of the lights video
our Channel got the most views that year
so obviously
AdSense added up yeah do you remember
how much like
ballpark probably like a few million
dollar in ad Revenue oh maybe like two
two million in AdSense probably and what
was overall in 2020 oh it would have
been like four four and a half yeah um
it was at the best year of Revenue to
date might have been
2021 um yeah but the the pie chart
stayed fairly consistent like
sponsorships made up a big portion yeah
um we started hack with that store I
think in 2020 technically mhm um and
just last year now it was actually it
accounted for 50% of our gross revenue
wow which was truly incredible and we're
so grateful for that it was a
historically very bad year for YouTube
views and sponsorship money so it's not
it doesn't actually compare to some of
our previous years it's definitely a
good start yeah and um the tricky thing
with that is
most of that came from the minis saer
sales yeah which is incredible but um
you can't expect to have outlier
products yeah all the time yeah um so we
recognize that this isn't like a
permanent thing like we we're going to
keep selling it obviously but the demand
isn't going to be like it was when we
first sold it and whatnot um so for
example this year ad Revenue has been
garbage um we've posted a lot less
videos um gotten a lot less views I'd
say Ad Revenue in 2023 was probably like
maybe 150 Grand our monthly overheads
300 wow it's not even enough to cover
two weeks of existing wow sponsorship
certainly helped and last year it was
actually the first time we we did a bit
of engineering on the side um because
people often ask like oh you guys must
you must do something to make real real
people money right like Consulting
engineering military contracts you know
all these things like no just YouTube um
and most of the time it's because
YouTube can be quite lucrative but the
other challenge that we've had again I
talked about like um exponential success
is great but it
also
um your focus is in one area yeah so we
would turn down smaller paying jobs and
things because it didn't make sense when
we could work on YouTube videos but the
problem is to start any new business you
got to start somewhere right so some of
those small paying jobs it might not
have been worth our time three years ago
but they could have grown into a
business yeah that could be even bigger
than YouTube today but because we were
hyperfocused just on YouTube we were
never able to take advantage of those
opportun
and even now it's like it's very hard to
we're very much up against the wall of
having to make content just to exist and
it's a really painful position to be in
where it's like I want to just make what
I feel like making and then there's a
lot of Doubt of like even if I went back
fully to my roots I might still not be
popular I might still not get views um
because um YouTube's changed as a
platform audience appetite for this kind
of thing has changed yeah um especially
with being a channel that's been going
on for N9 years fulltime your audience
ages out and unless you're replacing
that aging out audience with new
audience that's why you'll see a lot of
big
channels start to slip and fail um
because they've either tried doing
something else because they were tired
of whatever they were doing yeah but
they don't find the same success doing
it and then it it feels like a very
slippery slope when the the YouTube
algorithm notices it's just like well
your videos haven't been getting many
views we're going to show them to less
people and that's that's that's the fear
I live with every day um not
knowing what our future has in store on
YouTube and that's why we're trying to
build up haxm that store and other
businesses that can help be more like a
brick and mortar kind of like solid
sustainable thing so many takeaways from
that like one I think like when you're
building a company as a YouTuber
sometimes the work that you resist like
for me like you know I want to just
focus on the videos but we get a lot of
Consulting work and agency work and I'm
like you know what for the exact same
reason that you said like I should keep
diversifying the business because the
videos and the sponsorships you know
that could go up and down and so I I
mean I got to give credit to my wife and
business partner Amanda who's like okay
let's keep growing the Consulting side
while we grow the video side and invest
in that so we have something going but
the other thing that I want to dive into
in terms of your business is the
sponsorships and then the products
because I think you're doing things that
are so Innovative there that again so
many YouTubers can learn from on the
sponsorship side I I have to ask how
many times do you work with movie
studios on videos because it to me seems
like such a win-win that like if there's
a movie that's in production for 3 four
years something like that like ahead of
time that there's at least some kind of
conversation with the billions of views
that you've gotten of hey let's have the
hacksmith make an item from this movie
ahead of time and then line it up with
the trailer release like YouTube is a
bigger part of the strategy of Studios
do you find that's happening or do you
find they're still stuck in the stone
ages it it does feel like YouTube is
still the last
platform companies think about um so
what we find usually is when we do work
with movie studios and we've worked with
probably dozens over the years um is
it's in that last like month to weeks
before the movie comes out and it's
almost as if all right whatever whatever
we can dredge out of the advertising
budget that we haven't spent yet let's
throw it at YouTube and the problem with
our projects especially is they take a
lot longer so a great example is the the
bulletproof John Wick suit we started
that project as a passion project we
plan to release it near John Wick 4
because that's an easy way to kind of
capitalize on SEO and and people already
searching for John Wick and whatnot um
and in the middle of that I actually I
took my break and I stepped back from
YouTube and we put it on the back burner
and then the movie was coming up it was
closer it was closer and I'm like no I
don't feel like finishing it um and then
two weeks before the movie comes out the
production company that made John Wick
for reaches up and they're like you know
what be really cool can you make a
bulletproof Kevlar suit into weeks oh my
and post it in two weeks and the
approvals our legal department all that
and I was like well you're lucky I've
actually spent the past two years doing
this and it it worked out but obviously
that's not an ideal way to do it yeah um
and the only reason that video did so
well is because in the video you can see
how much work we put in yeah because the
reality is in another another timeline
alternate dimension
I didn't make the suit but they reached
out and were like resp do this I'm like
I got you
fam go to the suit store buy a
suit go to wherever you would buy a
bulletproof vest from take some scissors
cut it open sew it inside the suit bada
bang call it a day I would have achieved
the same goal of making a bulletproof
suit but that's an extremely low effort
video and and there's no way that video
would have done nearly as well um we
went to the gun range dozens of times
because we actually developed our own
composits working with manufacturers who
make the materials used for bulletproof
vests and whatnot and then the actual
tailoring of the suit um I think was a
solid two months of work if I had to
guess the sup probably costs over
$50,000 to make not including materials
because we actually worked with those
companies and they gave us the materials
for free and the other issue we have is
yes we've worked with all these
production companies we've only worked
with one person at these movie studios
and there is such big companies and
sometimes it's actually an external
agency so just because we've worked with
Warner Brothers before we've worked with
20th century before it doesn't mean we
work with and I don't know what level of
connection you need to get to where
either I know someone high up and it's
just like this is a goal like the
hacksmith is involved with every every
every movie release or something I don't
know I don't know how to get into the
right room yeah where I could meet those
people and because it really is a match
made in heaven and we could do some
really incredible things that could
potentially really bolster
movies um especially like with the
example the John Wick um video it did 10
million views in one week in the same
amount of time the movie did 140 million
at the box office if you take an average
ticket price of about 10 bucks
everything with inflation that's 14
million views yeah so we were almost one
to one parody with Hollywood with a $200
million budget movie yeah ours was free
to watch obviously yeah but I'm sure
that video took some fans who like H
maybe I'll see it too oh you know what
I'm going to see that and I think
there's so much value there and I would
love to get a better relationship with
all the big movie companies out there um
because it would also ow us to focus on
some of these really cool projects that
I'm passionate about because doing all
this is because I love movies like I'm a
huge movie buff obviously I love the
superhero genre and I've kind of built
up this Persona of the hacksmith is kind
of being this real life Tony Stark
mcgyver Captain America Batman right you
name it kind of kind of character and I
think the the two things from that on
the sponsor side and the fact there's
turnover I think for any Creator like we
see that as well we have relationship
with the brand managers not just the
brands and whenever you get that dreaded
out of office message you know when you
follow up you're like oh my God they
don't work at the company anymore I
don't know if this is just a us thing
but uh one tip perhaps for other
creators is that we send like our recap
report that we sent after a brand deal
or sponsorship to the other folks who
may have been on the thread and just say
hey like we saw that this person like
had a bounceback message I don't know if
they're working at the company anymore
but uh here are some of the results of
the past campaigns we love to work with
you guys moving
forward just plants a seed CU like
there's always movement rotation um and
then I'll also add the brand manager who
left that company on LinkedIn just so
they could keep us in mind for future
stuff um but it's funny to hear it in
your situation because I think you
represent the extremes that we could
still learn from because I also think
about that Captain America wakanda
shield that correct me if I'm wrong you
made that from just watching 3 seconds
of a trailer like no heads up from the
studio Y and then you went into a year
of making that I don't I don't think it
took that long um that was probably only
a few months a few months but you're
studying the frames like from the
trailer because you have no other source
material like I know marvel was big but
still like you know they they they have
a marketing budget and dedicating it to
yeah I mean I'd be happy to sign any
ndas if I got to see movies earlier um
lately I found at least for on my
Instagram following which is about a
million I get invited to movie premieres
in Toronto I don't get paid for it but I
love going to movies yeah and it's an
early screening of the movie I'm like
I'm down yeah I I I love going to the
theater yeah and even just putting a
Creator in the room or somebody creative
I I feel like there's Untold
possibilities of what seeing something
will trigger in terms of what you make
either as a product or a video um which
I think is so inspiring I mean that's
the other thing like um for any of these
big movies that we've made pro from
especially the lightsaber yeah I would
roll out the red carpet for any actor
from any of the Star Wars movies if they
wanted to drop by oh play with the real
lightsaber and I guarantee they'd have
an amazing day yeah but um reaching
those people's really hard to do and I'm
sure some of them have stumbled across a
video on on YouTube and maybe have seen
this but they might not know that like I
would literally roll out the red carpet
for them i' I'd show them a great time
and let them play with a lightsaber or
or whatever else but it's so hard to
reach people in Hollywood because
there's basically walls of people whose
sole job is almost to block you from
connecting with these people you got
your managers your agents and all that
stuff so that's definitely a big pain
Point too where it's just like I'm not
some crazy fan who just wants to meet
you for meeting you it's like no I made
something from a movie which I think you
because you're in the movie and you've
do you want to see it in real life like
for example the power loader I'd love to
get Sigourney Weaver here like she's she
she's getting a bit old she's in her 70s
but you drove it yesterday oh and I bet
she could beat you so yeah she kick my
ass um and same thing with like James
Cameron like the guy in his spare time
uses a submarine to visit the Mariana's
Trench he is an eccentric billionaire
and he obviously loves mechs because in
Avatar there's a Mech in Aliens they had
the power loader and whatnot I like to
think he probably hasn't seen it because
that seems like a no-brainer to me why
wouldn't you want to see a real life
Mech where else can you see that you
know so if anyone's watching who has
James Cameron's phone number let me
know do you feel like being based out of
Canada just outside of Toronto versus in
Los Angeles or New York like plays a
role in that I'm curious because I bet
there's people listening to this um I
grew up in Chicago Chicago and I was
like you know what like like La is where
I need to be to you know grow my career
as a Creator maybe I was wrong but
you've done it outside of Toronto yet
hearing you say a lot of these things is
interesting do you feel like your
location plays any role in that as a
Creator yeah I feel like doing what we
do being in La would probably make
things a bit
easier um every now and then I do get
invited to premieres and things in LA
and I can't always say yes because it's
a long way from here and especially
for aess celebrities and whoever
else time is time is money and no one
has time like it it takes a lot of
effort to fly across the country yeah to
to do this thing or whatever so um I
think it probably would be a lot easier
um but you saw herk oh yeah this is an
experience like this doesn't exist
anywhere else um um so I'd love to have
the opportunity to to show some people
and it's it has nothing to do with oh
you're famous I want to meet you I want
your a there's none of that it's just
like I really respect what you've done
yeah I respect your talent the things
you've been involved with and I would
love to share what I've done that's
connected to you yeah I mean if it blew
my mind to hold the light saer that you
made I can't imagine what I just imagine
like seeing Mark Hamill's face like up
yeah would be incredible that would be
like a memory for a lifetime I'm putting
it out there I think it's going to
happen I think you're going to make it
happen and and just putting Good Vibes
out there um tell me about the mini
saber um this is one of the most
successful products you sold on
hacksmith do store um how many units of
this and how much do you make off of
that item and maybe just show us how it
works it's like so at the end of the day
it is a butane torch Li
like a propane in handheld form and then
we also have color changers so this will
actually turn a nice bright red we also
have green working on yellow and purple
but yeah so um the inspiration for this
obviously came from us doing lightsabers
yeah but even before that I had
discovered a jet lighter like this from
China that I ordered on AliExpress
probably like eight years ago and I got
it and it was amazing I'm just like wow
this is the coolest lighter ever I've
never had a blowtorch that you can put
in your pocket and um I saw that there
was a gap in the market it was just like
the only way to get this right now is
from AliExpress it takes a month
shipping or from very scam like
Instagram ads because there's a lot of
scams on the internet now and especially
with shopping and buying things so I was
like huh maybe I could import them and
sell them offer two-day shipping like
Amazon and actually offer like a
guarantee that you're going to get it a
warranty and um offer it as a product so
we wh labeled mini saer gen one so we we
put our name on it but we were very
transparent on our website we're working
with this company you can buy it
elsewhere but we sell it right um and uh
the benefit you get from buying from us
is you'll actually get fast shipping um
it's guaranteed to work we have a
warranty all kinds of stuff like that
and um the original Mini saer did quite
well because again it was a quality
product I had found that I do actually
use yeah and um I I think we probably
sold 10,000 of those at least over a few
years but as soon as we started to see
that success we're like okay we got to
design our own we got to use this core
technology and make one that looks like
our Proto
lightsaber so that process took almost
two years
um from doing design finding the
manufacturer working with the
manufacturer and whatnot and when we
finally did release it it it it blew all
of our expectations out of the water um
when we did the kickstarter campaign for
it we did a million dollars gross sales
in one month wow which was huge wow um
that was going on one of our best months
of all time like across YouTube and
everything else and then when we finally
finally released it like we actually got
them in because we had some issues with
quality control at first and it took a
while for us to actually ship those
first units um but when we finally had
them in stock we did an actual release
video where they were in stock and you
could actually buy it and we sold out
within a week even though we ordered
like 10,000 of them we did a million
dollars in one week wow which was
incredible and that's really when we
realized that why are we advertising
other people's stuff we should advertise
our own stuff true vertical integration
why can't we be the manufacturer the
distributor the advertising machine the
marketing machine all those things
together um I think I gave an example
during the tour but if you can assume a
very basic ad revenue of ,000 a million
views and then a sponsorship usually is
at least 10 times that
$110,000 so that means if you're not
doing sponsorships you're potentially
leaving 10 grand on the table and only
making one when and we launched this
mini saer in the first four hours we did
400,000 views which resulted in $400,000
of gross sales so a dollar per view wow
whereas ad Revenue a dollar per thousand
views wow and that one that was that was
like a big light bulb moment where it's
like why are we advertising other
people's stuff if we could just come out
with awesome products like this we
wouldn't have to worry so much about
money or making videos and and all that
um so I'm already starting to work on
the Gen 3 version of this which will be
even better that's insane and the money
from this is also going to help fund the
first retractable cordless lightsaber
that you're working on in show to so
every single mini saer we sell includes
a little challenge coin that has the
hack logo on one side herk and on the
other side it says I help develop the
world's first lightsaber wow and it's
not referring to the thing we already
did because that was a Proto lightsaber
it's referring to Proto the one with the
backpack yeah it's referring to what
we're currently working on and what
we're using a good portion of the
profits from this to develop and the
reason we have to do that is because the
only way to get the fuel and
oxidizer into a handle is to use liquid
oxygen and liquid oxygen is cryogenic so
you literally get frostbite just holding
the thing it
makes things that are flammable more
flammable it makes things that aren't
flammable
flammable and it makes stuff explosive
if you build it wrong it quite literally
would be a pipe bomb so um the reason we
need the clean room is if there's any
hair
follicles skin cells dust hair whatever
inside one of those components that the
liquid oxygen is running through and as
it's expanding it can potentially cause
an
ignition and then the whole thing
explodes wow so we've built a clean room
here in order to continue developing
this liquid auction project despite it
being pretty dangerous yeah um we were
able to save quite a bit of money
researching and designing and building
our own clean room I think the total
cost was well over
$100,000 but to put that in perspective
If you hired a company that specializes
in building clean rooms for companies
you're probably looking at a price tag
10 times that wow like a million dollars
or more and um I'm excited to say we are
actually getting extremely close to
doing some first tests uh it'll last for
about two minutes which isn't very long
but still no hoses look Mom no hose yeah
um and it's going to be pretty
incredible my fear is the main first
video we did on the technology went Mega
viral everyone on the internet saw it
it's got like 50 million views now every
lightsaber video we've released since
then has been diminishing returns and
now some of those videos don't even get
a million views even though we've put
all this time energy and money into
designing this fully cordless thing from
a thumbnail standpoint it looks the
exact same as everything else we've
already done so I feel like we've almost
shot ourselves in the foot by doubling
down on lightsaber content over the the
years and if we had just posted that one
video let it go viral and been like okay
let let's work on the next
iteration and then finally a few years
later come out with
this I suspect there'd be a much better
chance for that video to go Mega viral
and really make a splash wow but today
I'm feeling pretty
pessimistic and
lately um and I'm like I don't know this
video will even get a million views
despite all this work all this effort
we've put into it and for for the people
who have bought the minis saer in
addition to gaining the coin they've
gotten access to our lightsaber update
videos because we knew okay well we
can't post low effort update videos but
the true fans who are really excited
about this we can share with them so
bogden's been doing weekly updates for
the past year so you can actually see
all the work that's gone into building
the lightsaber and we'll probably grab
some of that footage throughout um when
we finally put together that that real
video that we released to the the
general audience the the the main public
but I have I would be pleasantly
surprised if it performed very well I am
highly doubtful it will dude it is
mindboggling to hear you talk about
building a product that we've only seen
in movie screens and our imagination um
spending hundreds of thousands of
dollars to develop a room that like
basically is the same thing that
surgeons use to use cleaner actually
cleaner okay cleaner than the operating
rooms that surgeons use to do open heart
surgery like like you've developed that
here on this campus and we we had that
as part of our tour and in the same
sentence talk about the YouTube
thumbnail for that
video and the fact that if we don't have
it we don't have a thumbnail because
we've already used every every variation
of that already um like if you look at
the Proto lightsaber thumbnail we edited
out the chord so we already we we [__]
up we already we already used The Banger
thumbnail for this thing that we've
already that that we're still developing
I I I I think people are still going to
be interested and maybe there's like
Star Wars Tian or like Mark Hamill sees
it or I I I don't know but but but that
that also um it puts extreme pressure on
even producing the video too because I'm
like I need to have really good video
because if if I can't rely on the
thumbnail the video needs to be really
good so to the general audience watching
you might be like well why bother
building the clean room or spending all
this money and time developing something
that you don't even think the video is
going to do well and I ask myself that
question every
day um part of it is we've
been lightsabers and minis saers have
historically worked really well for us I
personally feel like we've kind of
flogged lightsabers to death and I would
actually love to move on with my life
and work on other things but the
challenge when you've made the Pinnacle
of sci-fi technology is like what else
is there you know um so back to the
example Le of like ad Revenue versus
sponsorship versus revenue from selling
something yeah so again when we saw
those sales from
this a
thousandfold ad Revenue even if these
lightsaber videos continue to get less
and less
views um there's still the potential if
it's a quality product and you have a a
core audience base even if that
lightsaber video gets a 100,000 views it
might still sell a million dollars worth
of mini saers yeah so it's still worth
doing yeah I wanted to dive into your
brainstorming process cuz during the
tour we also got to go into one of your
meeting rooms here we saw like these
different t- sheets on the board which
was one side a drawing of a rough
thumbnail the other side a description
um and obviously you have to build the
product with your team to be in the
video um how do you think about what
makes a good YouTube video today when
you have a series called make it real
and you're trying to create things from
fiction it's got to have a good outcome
it's got to pay off I like to ask a
question like if you ask an
eight-year-old child what having this
item from this video game in real life
would be like they would tell you it's
got to do this it's got to do that it's
got to do this if we fail to do any of
those things the project might be a let
down and the video might be let down and
the audience might be let down and
that's a cascading effect and you can
only do that so much before the audience
is like why I watch another video I
think some of um the initial draw in the
garage days I had the relatability of
being in a garage I was a pretty young
kid I mean I was 20 26 not even that
young um and it was very much like I was
making projects that allowed me to look
like a superhero and anytime we've tried
to do more traditional YouTube Trend
videos like the internet seems obsessed
with really big things and really small
things and we're like we're Engineers we
can build a really big thing but anytime
that we've not done like a make it real
those videos have not really done well
so um we almost have this core this core
topic which is make it real which is
what people expect of us yeah and the
challenge we've had is when we don't
have enough time to work on something or
sometimes we Greenlight something that
isn't that impressive it's just like the
average viewers like what are you doing
like you've got this incredible facility
and all these resources and you you made
this and I'm not saying all of our
projects are bad I'm just saying there
are projects where it's just like yeah
we probably shouldn't have done that but
hindsight's 2020 you might think it's
the best idea at the time and then
you're like the the big one for me is
like no one likes dedicated sponsorships
unless
clearly I feel like the only exception
is unless it's from a movie or unless
it's from a really big video game IP but
even in that case it has to be the thing
from that video game IP that people
would most like to see yeah so I'll give
you an example Amazon Prime recently
sponsored us to promote the new Fallout
TV show which is fantastic and I'm not
just saying that because they sponsored
us um but the problem was they pushed
and they wanted us to build a rad roach
just a giant cockroach that was remote
controlled I guarantee if you asked any
one of my subscribers what they want me
to see built from Fallout it's not the
radroach that's a prop at best yeah it's
not like if if we could have genetically
engineered and grew a giant cockroach
sure that video even though it's not
what they wanted to see that's like holy
[__] what the [__] did you do I'm scared
if hacksmith goes evil the world has
problems
um but if you asked anyone they'd want
us to build the power armor the full
exoskeleton suit or on a lower level
maybe the pit boy functional
supercomputer on your wrist or literally
any weapon from Fallout yeah and we
pushed back a little bit but they're
like no no we want to do this we want
blah blah blah and we needed the money
to keep doing what we're doing and it
was one of our worst performing videos
of all time
time and that really
hurts um
and even beyond that what's the damage
of doing a poor video yeah one that
people didn't want to see yeah how much
does that impact your channel in the
YouTube algorithm wow I mean I yeah I
think there's so much there like in
terms of letting the Creator create and
not like being too prescriptive and and
just to clarify real quick my team did
an incredible job building that rad
roach it's super real
um it took a lot of engineering to do um
not just anyone could have even done
what we did but the problem was the idea
was almost destined to fail before we
even started doesn't matter how much you
polish a
turd yeah once is going down the wrong
way yeah I wanted to ask um you've had
conversations with Mr Beast I think
there's a lot of parallels here like he
has a campus like you have a campus like
he has a big team you have a big team I
I have I have a few questions one I
heard um this quote where you guys were
talking and he basically said to you
like do you hate views or what was the
context of that why did he why did Mr B
say that to you yeah so I think that was
about two years ago he had asked us to
make some lightsabers for video also
only gave us two weeks notice but we we
pulled it together we did it I think he
had less than 50 million subscribers
back then so he was busy but probably
not as busy as he is today so there's a
bit of downtime and we're hanging out
playing basketball and stuff and then um
it was more so he was just like being
polite and hanging out with us and then
I kind of I told him about herk and his
his his ears kind of perked up and he's
just like you're doing what because not
many YouTubers have a campus there's Mr
Beast there's dude perfect maybe lus
Tech tips kind of and us as far as I
know um and suddenly he was interested
so we were sitting on his couch he
pulled up my channel on the TV and very
quickly I was like watch this video I
want I want to see your reaction to this
video and he's like no I'm like why not
he's like you can't cherry pick your
videos they should all be good so then
he started picking the videos that he
wanted to watch and he'd maybe give a
video sometimes as little as 5 seconds
and it was like in Gladiator where it
was just like yay or nay and um that's
because the Hook is so important and
he's like oh that was pretty good like I
can see why that video got views or no
[__] that video didn't get views um so
it was very it was harsh feedback but it
made sense right and at some point he
was like do you hate views do you hate
views
and I guess my my default excuse is we
put ourselves in this position where we
have to make content we're not
necessarily always making the content we
want to make and that's resulted in not
every video being great to go a bit
further with that um we did take that
advice and the Mr Beast approach to
videos is every video should be at least
as good as the last one ideally better
and it's paid off in Spades for Mr Beast
like the amount of views you no one's
gotten views like Mr Beast gets views um
and we actually tried adopting that uh
mindset and we we for the first time in
seven years were like all right no more
weekly content and we did it for two
reasons one was um because of the advice
from Mr Beast and two because I was
crazy burnt out super stressed from
managing all these things and the
thought was well we only worked on like
one video every month or two I could
actually focus on one thing and we could
be passionate about that thing that
we're doing and unfortunately this came
at the time when we were also in the
process of moving to this facility yeah
so we were already super busy dressed
spending more money than we had ever
done before and we only did this
experiment for maybe like not even and
half a year the Hope was we'd go from
four videos a month to one video a month
and we knew it would be a slow climb but
looking at some of the outlier channels
where it's just like video after video
gets tens of millions of views if we
could have gotten to that then the
business would have been a lot more
sustainable yeah but we couldn't afford
to keep trying m
and in that six months we didn't have a
single video pop off even though we were
putting more effort in and if I look
back there's a few
mistakes that maybe cost us that
strategy but the reality was we hit a
wall
where we had gone
from um a certain number of views a
month to 25% of the views and when your
entire business is based on YouTube that
essentially meant we took a 75% cut to
our
income which made it very unsustainable
like not even break even most of the
time and ever since then since it didn't
work we still try and be super selective
with our videos and we try not to make
videos that we think are going to hurt
the channel long term
um but we we haven't even been able to
get back up to weekly content since then
even even though we did it for seven
years and there's some videos where it's
just like man we made better videos back
then and it's just constant doubting of
what you're doing
because it it's really hard to look at
the big picture especially with YouTube
when you live and die by each video and
like if you get a few bad videos in a
row it's like well game over yeah let's
pack up we're done and then you get a
good video you're like and I've seen
these hilarious graphs talking about
being a YouTuber and it's just like that
Highs are really high and lows are
really low and it's like we're back baby
and it's like no we're not no we're not
oh God the end the world is ending hey
and it's just like it just plays with
you and it goes up and down and up and
down and that's so hard to run a
business when you don't know this and um
again hindsight's 2020 it's just like I
feel like I could have made better
decisions that could have put us on a
better path a long time ago and now
we're battling a lot of a lot of these
potential mistakes that we've made over
the years and sometimes it it feels
pretty dire and it's really hard because
it's not just it's not just me this
company supports 27 families it's
people's livelihood you know um and I do
believe what we're doing has a big
impact on the world and
like I think I'm a good role model but
if I'm not reaching an audience I'm not
being a role model so there's all these
like there's a lot of Doubt yeah and I
think that's one of the worst parts of
YouTube because everyone can look at
like point at the Big Shiny channels and
it's just like oh look they're doing it
and then every other channel where it's
just like you're fighting tooth and nail
to to stay relevant and I hate the idea
of a popularity game I really don't want
to play that game
I want to be able to do this and I think
there's there's an audience there but if
we're not able to do it the size that we
used to do
it how do
we go about doing it at a lower size um
like in my back pocket I was always like
well if everything goes to [__] we can
shrink down cut our
costs it could go back to me essentially
being in the garage and just making
stuff for fun because the reality is
like everything I've done even residual
ad Revenue it should be enough to
support me for the rest of my life if I
don't have high
costs but the fear there
is if the channel tumbles and it doesn't
pick back up even if we cut costs and
then I try and do it
myself ideally it climbs back up because
I'm the reason it grew in the first
place but I have so much doubt that I
could even do that today where it might
be this depressing thing where it's just
like well I've cut all the costs
everyone's gone I don't even have this
property anymore and now the videos I'm
making are doing worse and worse and
it's like this this channel death where
it's just
like and like how can how can that not
be attached
to your ego how can that not be like
well [__] the dog on that one you know
part of that also comes from nobody
talking about what you you just said
like I I think the whole narrative out
there is that bigger is better do fewer
uploads but the truth is we don't always
know what better is and sometimes
quantity helps you understand what
quality is like honestly I'm I'm envious
of the few channels that manage to keep
it super simple and literally you pop up
a handicam and you're filming what you
do and maybe someone edits it and makes
it a little shiny but it's literally
just you're doing the thing anyways that
was always the goal I want to be doing
the thing regardless of whether a
camera's rolling but I think a camera
should be rolling MH cuz it's probably
pretty interesting what I'm doing and I
feel like it would be a lot more
enjoyable life if it was just like yeah
the videos are super low effort like we
don't spend much time or money on them
but like it's documenting what we're
doing and we're having a fun time doing
it yeah and that's that's another like I
guess almost like dream perspective of
what I'd like
YouTube to be for me again yeah because
even though when I was small and not
making money from YouTube I was still
doing it because I wanted to do it I
wanted to share my story I think that's
one of the most honest things I've heard
and
honestly I feel like we don't hear that
enough in conversations with top
creators and advice that they give I
wanted to ask in so many ways you check
the boxes of what a national and
international headline and story should
be I mean you have a product with
millions of dollars in sales um you have
a YouTube channel with over 10 million
subscribers you have this crazy campus
that like again like it blew my mind
when we spent 14 hours here yesterday um
you have an inspiring educational story
um why do you feel like more people
aren't talking about you to me I feel
like like back in the first four years
when everything was
growing that was that was like prime
time to keep things growing and maybe
there was was certain decisions we could
have made back then that would have
meant by today I'd be as big as Mr Beast
who knows but those are all wh ifs and
you can't really you can't dwell on wh
ifs um again a lot of it I feel like
stems back
to we set the bar too high and we've
done too many projects that don't meet
the bar so we've lost some of that
original Allure allure that we had I
think it's very challenging to to try
and regain that you you almost need this
like actual like rebirth Resurrection
Arc and as much as I'd love to have that
Resurrection Arc after say my
video um announcing a break I haven't
really had it because things haven't
really changed I'm kind of in the exact
same position I was before I made that
video M which is burnt out
scared uncertain about the future
uncertain of the
business whether or not I'm a good
entrepreneur um and that's a very
challenging thing to break past um so
while I would love to have success like
Mr Beast I understand why I don't and
that that kind of hurts cuz it's like I
know I know there's a part of me that
could could be that successful and I
don't know why I haven't
like whether it's decisions I've made I
that that's the killer it's because it's
like I know I'm a talented
person seeing her and seeing the
inside I have I know I have talent so I
I still have confidence in myself and I
know I can achieve more and I know I can
succeed more if I want to and I feel
like it's almost like a a tug-of-war of
do I even want to and can I because I've
built this business that didn't enable
me to flourish which means it's very
like how do you get out of that do you
say [__] it I'm sorry everyone you're
all
fired I need some time off and the only
way I'm going to get time off
without losing
everything just temporarily lose
everything but I can't take that risk
because I don't want to fire like firing
people sucks we had to do layoffs once
and that was the worst thing I've ever
been through and it's really hard when
you're you're putting the needs
of the team above your own for what it's
worth I think you're one of the smartest
people I've met and empathetic and I
think it's also rare to find somebody
who is as good at engineering as they
are at branding and storytelling can you
talk about like the hacksmith brand like
how you think about it um take me into
the future of the hacksmith hacksmith do
store like how do you think your brand
and where you're going will evolve from
here becoming a bigger brand in the
product space um I truly believe in the
products we're developing going with
premium quality and really making useful
things like I love the EDC carry like
every every day carry um that's why I'm
working on the Smith pants prototype
that I'm wearing because I believe these
are the best pants you'll ever wear it's
a pretty hard thing to actually sell
um um but getting outside of YouTube and
especially even just seeing something
that you designed in a store I feel like
that's that's one of one of the big
goals of lots of Engineers where it's
just like I designed that and hey look
there it is and we're not quite there
yet but I I hope we we get there um and
on a much larger scale again like in my
master plan I hope that one of these
days we'll we'll come up with something
that actually like makes a difference
changes the world um originally because
of all the Tony Stark connections and
whatnot I'm like exoskeletons are so
cool can I please become the company
that makes badass exoskeletons so I can
live out this Tony Stark fantasy and the
reality is exus guns are really really
hard where the technology is finally
catching up like seeing all like the
humanoid
robots if you can make a humanoid robot
you can make an augmented human too and
the stuff like that excites me and I
feel like I I drive a lot of passion
from doing something like that that's
that's really
meaningful um so like our our recent
video where we we gave a YouTuber in the
UK a bionic hand that was really amazing
I'm just like we should do more stuff
like this because beyond the video this
is this is really cool to do and
probably has a much bigger impact than
than what we normally do and whatnot can
you tell me about an interaction you've
had with a fan because I think your fans
are so different and that you changed
their mind about engineering about stem
about their career choices what's a
conversation you've had with a fan
that's stuck with you yeah so when Ian
and I started all this back in the
beginning it was just because we wanted
to build cool [__] and very shortly
after publishing cool [__] on the
internet we started to get comments from
kids and even adults being like I didn't
know engineering could be cool that's
really neat maybe I'll be an engineer so
we started seeing these comments where
it's just like we've inspired people to
go to engineering school or to get into
uh steam science technology engineering
the Arts math all that stuff and now
that we've been doing it for so long we
started getting comments and I've met
fans in person where it's just like yeah
I used to watch you back in high school
um you really inspired me to go to
engineering school I went to engineering
school for four years and I graduated
and now I've been working my dream job
for two makes me feel really old but it
makes me feel like holy [__] I really
made an impact and made a difference and
then um there was this one time in
person in a convention it felt like this
guy was buttering me up he's just like
changed my life so much all this stuff
and I'm like that's incredible I'm just
like and then I was asking him I'm like
what do you think of my videos lately
and he's like my I haven't watched
anything since since I was
16 and I'm like what you you just you
just told me how like inspirational I
was and how you love my videos and now
you're telling me you don't even watch
them and that that was when I realized
that all it takes is one video to change
someone's life and in that person I had
create a lifelong fan just from one one
video and I think we usually get um
stuck as YouTubers where it's just like
we want all subscribers to watch all
videos because we always just needs to
be a bigger number need to make more
views
but having that
interaction made me realize it doesn't
[__] matter I've already made content
that has changed lives and is continuing
to change lives and I really should be
proud of that
instead of being like Oh but I need more
views and realizing that that's all it
takes sometimes is just one video to
change someone's life is really powerful
and I
think um you can do that when you're
doing educational content when you're
doing inspirational things because
really is it's it's all about letting
people dream bigger giving them
permission to dream bigger and showing
them that it's
possible and I think that's that's
really
powerful dude I I feel like you've
inspired me to dream bigger and thank
you for being so transparent with your
answers about your business your mental
health and just so generous with your
time James it just I'm I'm blown away
man thank you it's been a pleasure